INTRODUCING KATAS
For those not familiar with the concept of kata in programming, I can not make a better definition that the one on Code Kata:

A kata is an exercise in karate where you repeat a form many, many times, making little improvements in each. The intent behind code kata is similar. Each is a short exercise (perhaps 30 minutes to an hour long). Some involve programming, and can be coded in many different ways. Some are open ended, and involve thinking about the issues behind programming. These are unlikely to have a single correct answer.

The point of the kata is not arriving at a correct answer. The point is the stuff you learn along the way. The goal is the practice, not the solution.

I have some recurrent katas that I repeat from time to time, you can find a lot of proposals on the Internet to have fun with.

SANDRO MANCUSO AND CODURANCE
I first met Sandro Mancuso at the Barcelona Java Conf of 2017. He gave the closing keynote and then I attended a TDD workshop that he made. The closing keynote was particularly inspiring and made me buy his book The Software Craftsman: Professionalism, Pragmatism, Pride (actually it was a present from my wife).

I really enjoyed the book and I can not recommend it enough so if you don’t have it, get one copy soon.

While I was reading the book, a couple of colleges from a previous job ( Mike and Marc ) told me that they were working with Codurance (the consultant company co-founded by Mancuso) on their current project. They spoke very well of their experience and told me about an Open House event that Codurance was having on their Barcelona offices.

I decided to go to met with them and catch up. I also was enjoying the book so I though it was a good idea do a little bit of networking.

At the event, Sandro was explaining how the company works, how is the recruitment process and a lot of cool facts about their job. Everything was very interesting but I really liked how involved everyone is on the recruitment process, taking a lot of care of selecting no only a good professional, but a person with similar values and approaches to software.

One of the tools they use, is a programming exercise that the applicant can do in about two weeks and then submit for them to check. They compromise in actually checking the code and give an informed feedback, so they take their time. It is like have a pair programming session with a delay. The feedback is not only “ok, you did good, you can come for the next round” or “sorry, your code is not good enough” but they actually take time to check the code and give useful feedback like “you may want to use inheritance on that class” or “maybe you should consider this pattern instead”. Like a real pair programming session. And then you may make the next round of the process or not, but you always are going to receive a useful feedback so you can improve.

That is really nice. Well… it shouldn’t be nice, it should be a standard. If a candidate is investing time on make what he or she thinks is the best solution, why the company can not invest the same time?

As a software engineer, I have suffered ridiculous job offers, asking for technologies obsolete five years ago and making interviews with “teach leads” with no technical background whatsoever. It is refreshing seeing people that actually care.

THE SOCIAL NETWORKING KATA
I found several kata exercise on Sandro Mancuso GitHub and decided to do the Social Network one.

This is my implementation of the exercise, on my GitHub.

I know it can be improved a lot more but you have to stop somewhere. I code it in about three days in spare time.

THE TAKE OVER
I will not send this solution to Codurance, nor do I expect feedback from them. I only found the exercise interesting and wanted to share the experience.

There are a few more katas on the Sandro Mancuso’s GitHub page, some of them with fun rules like Only one dot for line, Not a single ELSE sentence on the code and things like that. Really nice gymnastics and practice exercises.

We have to keep our craft sharp if we want to become better coders. I am going to solve katas more regularly so I can keep improving.

REFERENCES:
Code Kata
Sandro Mancuso GitHub
Codurance
Barcelona Java Conf